+++
date = "2016-02-05T15:53:57-06:00"
title = "Thackeray"
tags = ["quotes", "books" , "Thackeray"]
author = "TCB"
draft = false
+++
*[NB - this is one of a number of old posts I may or may not fish out of the old backups. We shall see.]*

At various times in my life I have chosen plenty of 'slug quotes' to top this
here Ye Olde Webbe Syte. Dear departed Hunter S. Thompson held pride of place a
few times with 'Buy the ticket, take the ride.' I think I had a Nietzsche quote
up there once or twice, the one about the abyss looking into you, probably when
I was feeling even more pretentious than usual. Some Gore Vidal perhaps? I
believe so, my good man, I believe so.

However on this fairly large reiteration of Ye Olde Webbe Syte I decided to go
with 'A Novel without a Hero.' That phrase was, and presumably still is, the
subtitle for Vanity Fair by William Makepeace Thackeray. It took me some time
to really enjoy reading Thackeray. Uncle Willie, I fear, is taught like
medicine in school if he is taught at all. He is the book equivalent of Vick's
vapo rub, something that someone in authority says is somehow good for
something, so being a decent sort one tolerates it with as much patience as
possible. 

Only much later in life did I learn the gentle charm of his books. Thackeray
wrote comedies, both in the classical and modern sense. Comedy here is partly a
term of art. His books are classical comedies in that they are not
tragedies--everyone doesn't die or wish they could be dead by the end. They are
modern comedies in that are funny, satirical, and in the end the good guy gets
the loot **and** the girl. Thackeray's prose and his settings are typical of
nineteenth century popular novels. That is, they are spun from cotton wool and
confectioner's sugar and castles in the air. One of the funnier things in
Vanity Fair, for a modern reader, is that Thackeray explains repeatedly how
luxurious a house might be by declaring the size of the carriage that could be
driven through the dining room. It's sort of like writing a book today where a
character lives in a house with a ten car garage; it implies that she does not
just have a nice house, but also ten cars to park in it. In Thackeray's case, a
character has not just an opulent dining room, but also a 'four in hand' to
drive through it. With a footman or two, of course.

As much as Thackeray hews to most of the novelistic conventions of his time, he
could not really write characters that are conventionally lovable. Jane Austen
novels are, like Thackeray's, filled with great prose and enviable settings.
But Austen's characters are drawn along pretty typical lines. There is the Good
Girl, the Charming Father, the Humble Vicar, the Harpy Mother or the
Exasperating Aunt, the Vamp who tries to steal The Man from the Good Girl and
is usually Foiled by The Friend. This is not to knock Austen, I love her books
too, but Thackeray was unwilling, and probably incapable, of writing characters
a reader truly thinks of as a 'hero.'

In some sense, then, every book he wrote was a 'novel without a hero.' But
Vanity Fair goes that extra mile. Becky Sharp (Thackeray was also a brilliant
namer of characters, Becky is plenty sharp indeed) starts the book as an
ambitious, materialistic, covetous girl and ends it as an heiress who probably
murdered her loathsome husband and kept his money. The degree to which she is
happy in the book is a function of how close she is to her goal of acquiring
wealth and pleasure, and little else. Becky dissembles and manipulates whenever
she thinks it might be to her advantage, betraying her closest friends and
helping her feckless (first) husband to cheat at billiards. While doing so she
feels even minimal regret only when, on rare occasion, she gets caught.

That said, it _is_ impossible to read the book and _not_ cheer, in some sense,
for Becky to 'win' in the end. For all of her failings, she is smarter,
prettier, and working harder than any of the 'betters' she wishes to emulate
or replace. She was dealt a set of cards and only tries to play them as best
she can, and while doing so she is vastly more honest than everyone around
her in the book. Becky is also, by a few multiples, the person one would most
like to know or, crucially, bed. By far the sexiest character in the book,
however potentially fatal a liaison with Becky would be, few could turn her
down.

So then, the 'novel without a hero' might, in fact, have a hero, or rather a
heroine. It just happens she is not especially heroic. In terms of the novel
this is hardly an invention of the nineteenth century or by Thackeray.
Academics tend to put forth Don Quixote as the first novel ever produced. Its
hero is not quite right in the head, could be actually psychotic, and certainly
never triumphs over anything. Anti-heroes, then, look to be as old as the novel
itself. What sets Vanity Fair apart for me is how deeply, essentially unheroic
every one is. But in Thackeray's gifted hands, for us, reading about all of
these unheroics is a joy, no matter how treacherous the characters and gruesome
the situations. Vanity Fair is a world terribly short on heroes, yes, but still
somehow saturated in glorious, flattering, even hilarious light.

On a more personal level, as I was trying to find a slug for this site, 2015
was a year in which I did not cover myself in glory. I will avoid long
descriptions of the Sturm und Drang, the Blood and Gore, I had to survive last
year. But it was humbling for one who is not particularly humble. It seems to
me that most of us wish we were heroes (and a few of us wish we were in
Thackeray novels), but the fact is nearly all the time we come up way, way
short. This web site will aspire in its best moments to be novelistic, at least
in the prose, but I think it is well past time to keep things cheerful and give
up on the hero bit.
